# Offboarding Policies

Congratulations on completion of your work in the McKone lab! 
As you prepare to move on to another exciting opportunity, you will need to complete the tasks listed below.
Once you are done, pelase certify completion by [filling out our Offboarding Checklist](https://pitt.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/sites/mckonelab2/Shared%20Documents/Handbook/assets/unused/mckonelab%20offboarding%20checklist.docx?d=w96443b6698c54073b097f1ce263cb082&csf=1&web=1&e=x5cQ8H) and handing it in to James.  

## Lab tasks

### Collect and store or dispose of lab materials

You will need to collect and review all the samples you have generated and lab supplies that you have been accumulated for your own individual use.
Each of these should either be disposed of, handed off to another lab member, or consolidated into the relevant shared lab spaces for general use by others.
Any samples that you believe are important for ongoing work or of potential use for future experiments should preferably be given to a labmate whose responsibility will be to continue working with those materials.
In the unusual circumstance in which there is no obvious lab member to take these materials, important samples may be consolidated into a suitable container for long-term storage with clear labeling. 

### Clean and consolidate lab space

Any physical space you have been occupying should be cleared and completely cleaned of all remnants of your work.
This includes storage spaces like lab drawers that were designated for your individual use; these should be cleared and labels removed so they may be repurposed for use by new lab members in the future.
Note that this task is especially important because we have found the most problematic chemical safety violations in our lab to be hazardous materials left behind by prior lab members without adequate labeling or safety considerations.

### Finalize and export your lab notebook

The legal framework governing lab notebooks generated by University researchers is that they remain the property of the University.
Therefore, notebooks need to be archived permanently on campus or using digital resources owned by Pitt.
However, you are free to retain copies for your own reference.
Assuming you followed the recommended strategy of [keeping an electronic lab notebook](../professionalTraining/documentingWork.md), the version for archival should be exported into one or more files using an appropriate file format like PDF.
You are strongly encouraged to create and export a brief written summary as a preamble to your lab notebook that describes, in general terms, how another lab member can most efficiently go about navigating your lab notes.
If you kept hard-copy notes of any type, these should be consolidated and physically stored in a designated location in our lab offices.

### Archive your data

Alongside your lab notebook, any and all data that was generated in the course of your work should be archived for permanent storage.
In this case, the word "data" should be interpreted broadly to encompass every piece of quantitative and qualitative information that you collected and stored in the course of your work in our lab.
This includes, for example:

* Raw data, such as text files containing numerical values 
* Graphs, plots, and tables that were generated from raw data
* Digital files containing software code that was used to execute analysis
* Photos and drawings of laboratory apparatus

In most cases, your data will have been generated and stored digitally.
The digital files should be collected and transferred into the designated [archive directory in the lab SharePoint server](https://pitt.sharepoint.com/:f:/r/sites/mckonelab2/Shared%20Documents/Archives/Alumni%20Data%20Archives?csf=1&web=1&e=wfVuml), which will make it accessible to all lab members.
If you have collected any data using physical media (e.g., a hand-drawn diagram of an experimental setup), these should be digitized or physically consolidated into a bound notebook as with a hard-copy lab notebook. 
As noted above, it would be worthwhile to generate a short "key" or "codex" document explaining how your digital data have been organized to faciliate efficient review and retrieval by others.

## Non-lab tasks

### Clean office space and turn in keys 

As with your lab space, your office space should be cleared of personal materials and cleaned thoroughly.
Any office equipment or supplies that are the property of the lab (e.g., computer hardware) should be returned to the state in which you found them, to the extent this is possible.
This means removing files and erasing individual account profiles on lab computers, for example, and ensuring office equipment is clean.
If any lab-own office hardware is no longer functional, let James know and make arrangements for repair or disposal before you leave.
You are welcome to keep your office keys until you are ready to leave campus for the last time, at which point you should return it to James or Bob Maniet.

### Exit interview

Whenver possible, James likes to spend at least an hour or two chatting with lab members within the last few weeks before they leave our lab for the last time.
These discussions usually include James giving some general feedback and encouragement, as well as opportunities for you to provide him some feedback of your own as to ways you think our lab can become a better and better place to learn and work.
Feel free to reach out to  James in advance of your departure to make arrangements for one or more discussions of this type.