# Documenting Your Work

These are recommendations for how McKone lab members should document and present their work, including general guidelines on keeping lab notes, writing formal and informal documents, and preparing presentations.

## What goes into a lab notebook

Everyone in the McKone Lab is required to keep a lab notebook that contains a contemporaneous record of all your lab research. To be more specific, each lab notebook entry needs to contain a *complete record of the work you have done*. 

In practice, this means every entry needs some kind of list (acceptable) or narrative description (better) of every step of every experiment you did that day. Using as an example a hypothetical lab session in which you collected several dozen sets of electrochemical current versus voltage data, this doesn't mean you have to have to plot every one of those datasets. But it does mean that if you collected 3 consecutive measurements that were similar and only want to plot the third one in your notebook, you must include in your notes that you are only including one of three datasets that were collected.

You also need to document every technical aspect of your experiments. This means writing down the names, manufacturers, purities, and lot numbers of the chemicals you use. It also means describing (and ideally taking photographs) all of your experimental apparatus. Note, however, that this usually only needs to be done once—the first time you use that chemical or apparatus. After that, you can simply reference back to the prior entry that gives the relevant experimental details, i.e. "see description from May 13 of this year for full details of the apparatus."

For every experiment, you need to provide an explanation for why you ran the experiment and your (preliminary) interpretation of the results. The point here is not to try to make your lab notebook look like a published research article; rather, the point is for you to fully document not just your data, but the thinking that went along with the data. This is tedious, and it will be awkward if you have not done it before, but it's extremely important!

Finally, you should be using your lab notebook to write reflectively about your work. This means you can and should create lab notebook entries from time to time that don't have any data all. Instead, take a few hours to think through the work you have been doing and think about the purpose, the main objectives, your hypotheses, etc. And when you do this, write it all down.

## Tools for notebook keeping

The default option for keeping notes in the McKone lab involves using [Microsoft OneNote](https://www.microsoft.com/). OneNote is a cross-platform app that allows you to take digital notes (formatted text, images, tables, embedded files) via individual entries organized into virtual notebooks. Your institutional Microsoft 365 account automatically provides access to OneNote. Seek help from James or a more senior lab member if you need assistance getting started. You may also keep a paper notebook handy for writing down experimental observations, procedural details, reagent weights, etc., when you are not near a computer; but these notes should be treated as strictly temporary and transcribed into your digital notebook entry within a few hours after completing the work. Your OneNote notebook, and not any paper notes, will be treated the original and permanent record of the work you complete in our lab.

In addition to notebook entries, which should contain written text, calculations, diagrams, and data visualizations (tables, graphs, plots, etc.), original data files must be kept organized and archived to Pitt's cloud-based storage system, [Microsoft OneDrive](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/onedrive/online-cloud-storage). Make sure your lab notebook clearly indicates where the data files corresponding to a particular notebook entry are stored. By far the easiest way to do this is to maintain your notebook and cloud storage directory organized strictly by date.

## (EARLIER VERSION) Keeping track of your lab work

It’s important to document your work carefully in a lab notebook. Lab members have a handful of options when it comes to selecting the format for their lab notes:

-   Standard paper notebook
-   Electronic notes, e.g., using LabArchives or Microsoft OneNote

Of course a paper notebook is still the most “tried and true" method to keep track of lab work. Most lab members have likely kept paper notes in their high school or undergraduate science lab courses; keeping notes in a research group like ours is very similar. All pages should be numbered and entries should be dated. The researcher’s name and contact information should be written in the inside cover. When a project is complete or a notebook is filled, the researcher should sign and date the final page (or back cover) to indicate that the work has been finalized and that it was described and documented accurately. Although nowadays most data is collected and stored in digital format, researchers using paper notebooks should print out graphical results and paste or tape them into their notebook in an entry dated according to when the data were collected.

Prof. McKone recommends use of electronic lab notebooks. He used Microsoft OneNote to keep track of his graduate and postdoc work from 2010–2016 to good effect, and he also has some (generally positive) experience with LabArchives. Nowadays the vast majority of data collection in lab is done with the help of computers, so one is always close at hand. In addition to OneNote, which offers a free-form template for note-taking, Pitt maintains a university-wide license for LabArchives, which offers more built-in features for lab researchers as well as an online interface at the expense of a bit more clutter. Other software for electronic notes is also available, and lab members are encouraged to consult with senior colleagues or Prof. McKone to help decide which medium would be best for their notes.

Regardless of the format used, research notes should provide a narrative description, as well as raw and/or graphical data as appropriate, for every single experiment a researcher attempts. Documentation should be clear and complete to facilitate reproduction or analysis by another researcher with a comparable skill level. A good rule of thumb is to imagine yourself opening your notebook to a random entry 6 months after it was written, such that your specific memory of the day has faded. You should be able to use the notebook entry alone to accurately reproduce the experiment and achieve comparable results. In fact, in many cases this is exactly what researchers do when it comes to collecting a few final datasets to round out a manuscript or a thesis.

Data analysis (which includes preparing and discussing plots, diagrams etc.) should be accomplished contemporaneously or shortly after completion of the corresponding experiment, and it should be clearly documented in your notebook. There are a lot of excellent software packages that can be used for quantitative and statistical data analysis and visualization. Prof. McKone likes to prioritize use of free and open tools, so preference would be to use Python libraries (e.g., SciPy, NumPy, Pandas) or the R software package for analysis. Other options include Matlab, Mathematica, Origin, Sigmaplot, and Excel, all of which can be obtained for free or at a discount for academic use.

As mentioned above, raw data will likely be in digital format. In the unlikely event that you generate data in “hard copy," it best to digitize it with a scanner or camera. Files should be named using a consistent, understandable syntax, archived, and stored in a central location with regular backups. Currently active members of the group can analyze and store data on personally owned computers if they choose, and we will also provide access to shared group computers and a dataserver for storage. Cloud data storage services like Dropbox, Microsoft OneDrive, Google Drive, and others also work nicely for storing and archiving data. When possible, always try to export and store digital data in non-proprietary formats. Usually this means plaintext files with comma or tab-delimited values, or established open formats like XML. When in doubt, talk to a colleague or Prof. McKone about the best format location for storing data.

Prof. McKone and others will request informal reports from time to time to construct presentations, grant proposals, and group research reports. In most cases the documents you provide do not need to follow a particular format, and you can use whatever software you want to prepare the documents. Word processors such as Microsoft Word, Apple Pages, LibreOffice Writer, or Google Documents are available at low or no cost, and they can handle small and medium-sized documents containing text and graphics without much difficulty.

Researchers who have completed their work in the McKone group should make available a copy of all of their notes. If you kept paper notes, this means collecting your notebooks and giving them to Prof. McKone for storage. For digital notes it is best to export everything in an appropriate archival format and to also make available the source files. All raw data, notes, etc., should then be saved to shared server space.

## Presenting Your Work

Each member of our group will have ample opportunities to prepare and deliver presentations at internal group meetings and external seminars. Usually this means preparing visual aids using presentation software. Microsoft Powerpoint is by far the most common piece of software used for this purpose, and it works well. Alternatives include Apple Keynote, Google Documents Slides, LibreOffice Impress, and Prezi. In the interest of interoperability, it is recommended that you export presentation slides to PDF before sharing them with others, or if you are delivering your talk on a machine that is not your own.

For internal meetings, there is no need for fancy formatting, but make sure all of your visual aids are legible and appropriately labeled (especially axis labels!). Formal seminars, thesis defense presentations, etc. should be prepared more carefully with attention paid to both content and aesthetics. From time to time we may discuss best practices for preparing visual aids and delivering excellent presentations.

For poster preparation, Powerpoint is also the most commonly used software, but it doesn’t handle the large resulting file sizes very well. Other software is also available, such as Adobe Illustrator/InDesign, Inkscape, or Apple Pages, which seem to work better for this application. Posters should always be exported and proofed in PDF format prior to final printing.
