# Giving an Oral Presentation

Giving a good research talk can be a challenge. The best presentations have been prepared well enough so that the speaker knows exactly what he/she want to say but can also “read the room” and respond to the audience. There is no lack of advice on research presentations, especially in academic circles. Keep in mind that the best approach is probably different for everyone. This guide gives just one perspective on effective planning and execution of *formal* oral presentations, like conference talks. A simplified but analogous approach would be useful for informal talks, like group meeting presentations.

## Preparing the content

The first step in giving a good research talk is preparing the content of the talk. Although not all technical lectures require visual aids, the vast majority of research talks include a set of visual aids (sometimes referred to as a "slide deck") prepared in Microsoft Powerpoint or similar software. However, you must resist the urge to assume that the whole of the talk exists only in the slides you prepare. If that were the case, there would be no need for you to deliver a lecture at all! So it is important to carefully consider, construct, and practice the verbal content of the talk as well as the visual aids.

Prior to any formal preparation, take some time to think about the data and results you would like to present, and why. Then think critically about the context of the talk, including how long it will be and who is the intended audience. A good research talk is one where audience members, regardless of their level of expertise, can summarize the main points in one or two sentences; if not, the intended message is probably too complex. This isn’t necessarily because people have bad memories, but rather that memory is naturally hierarchical, and so the best chance you have to make a significant impact is to provide the audience a very compelling set of conclusions that can be stated simply and supported by evidence in the form of data and discussion.

### What to include

#### 1. Introduction

 The introduction usually begins with some preliminary remarks where you will introduce yourself and the topic of the talk. A title slide often accompanies these remarks. It is customary to thank the organizers or the person who invited you, and it might also be appropriate to include in your remarks and title slide the names of other researchers who were instrumental to the work you will present. Many people also choose to include some kind of graphical element on the title slide, such as a graphical schematic associated with your research or perhaps some branding material (like a logo or photo) related to your lab or home institution.

 Next it is common to deliver an outline of what will be discussed. This can be done verbally with or without a written outline as a visual aid. Outlines can often be omitted for short lectures (about 25 minutes or less), because it is relatively easy to hold the attention of your audience for that length of time without first preparing them with an outline.

 The last part of the introduction begins the technical content of the lecture, where you begin describing the purpose and context of the research to be presented. Include a summary of prior work and an explanation of the key challenges or interesting questions that were addressed by the work you will discuss. It may also be appropriate to state very simply

#### 2. Body Section

This is the main part of the lecture, and will take up the majority of the allotted time. Here you should walk the audience through the technical content of your research by describing (a) what was the technical work you carried out, (b) what were the main results, and (c) how those results support or refute your hypotheses or inform your answers to the questions that you sought out to address. Use visual aids, including graphical and tabular data, schematic images, and photographs to convey the qualitative and quantitative content of your work.

It will also likely be necessary to spend some time describing or even teaching about the techniques that you used before discussing the associated results. Keep in mind that even the most seasoned researchers generally don't mind being reminded how a particular tool or technique works. This type of explanation will also go a long way to establishing your credibility as an expert in the field, which makes the rest of your discussion more believable.

A few different organizational approaches for presenting technical work are quite common. You may choose, for example, to present a story arc structure, where research results are discusses in the context of an overarching challenge that you were hoping to overcome, where each piece of new data either helped or hindered. This style works well to keep the audience engaged, and makes it easy to interject your own emotional content and humor into your lecture. Another approach might be to present each key conclusion as a headline, followed by a discussion of the data and discussion that justify the conclusion. This approach is helpful in that it makes absolutely clear to the audience what are the main points of your talk. Other organizational approaches may also be reasonable, depending on your personality, the audience, and the content of the talk.

For longer presentations (45 minutes to an hour or more), it is usually helpful to break the body section into several smaller subsections. Each subsection should have a similar structure, and they should be set off from one another in a clear way using verbal and/or visual cues. Connections can then be drawn between subsections after they have been individually presented. In this case, there is often a clear logical way to order the subsections that will allow you to build in complexity over the course of the talk.

#### 3. Conclusion

The concluding section will vary in length, depending on the scope of the talk. This is your chance to summarize and emphasize the most important messages of your presentation. Although it may feel redundant, it is perfectly appropriate (and even helpful) to directly repeat key points that you made earlier in the lecture. In this context, keep in mind that repetition is crucial for memory, so the points that you want the audience to remember should be stated at least two to three times over the course of the talk. It is also helpful to include one or more visual aids corresponding to your main conclusions. These can either be new graphics that synthesize multiple key points, or repetitions of images that appeared earlier in the talk.  

At the very end of the talk, it is customary to include acknowledgements where you should mention and thank everyone who was involved in the conceptual and practical execution of the research, including sources of funding or fellowship support. It is helpful to compile these acknowledgements into a visual aid, which might include bullet lists of names or (even better) photos or logos of the people and organizations who were involved. You may need to seek permission prior to using photos or logos, however.

### The Process of Writing the Talk

The next key concern is how to actually go about drafting and revising the content of your presentation. As noted earlier, it is often easier to focus on the slides at the expense of what you are actually going to say, but it is important to avoid this tendency. A general approach to preparing the talk content and visual aids might include the following:

- Assemble the data of interest in the form of rough figures and diagrams; even digitized hand sketches will do for a first draft!
- Organize the rough figures into a visual outline of the talk. Many of these figures will likely make it into the final talk in some form.
- Draft a written narrative outline, which could be attached directly to the visual aid file(s) or included as a separate text file.
- Reorganize the visuals as needed, and adapt the written narrative into appropriate headings and presenter notes.
- Construct title, outline, conclusions, and acknowledgement slides to bookend the talk. This will complete the first draft.
- Iteratively revise the figures, diagrams, slide order, and narrative outline to work toward a final draft.

In almost all cases, the goal should be to tell the story of your research project with as few extraneous details as possible. It is tempting to try to dazzle the audience with a lot of data under the expectation that conclusions are convincing based on the volume of results alone. Taking this approach, though, prevents you from giving sufficient discussion for any single piece of data which, ironically, can lead the audience to feel unconvinced. A good rule of thumb is never to show or discuss anything that you are not prepared to explain in detail if an audience member were to ask you about it. You should also plan to refer directly, in some way, to every visual aid you use in the talk, so avoid including graphics, data, or images for purely aesthetic purposes or that the audience will need to puzzle out for themselves.

A handful of additional recommendations on talk contents are as follows:

- In addition to helping introduce your topic, an outline also gives the audience a sense of where is the beginning, middle, and end of the lecture. For example, audience members will get very nervous if the first out of five points on your outline takes 80% of the allotted time to discuss. Therefore, it is a good idea to structure any outline visual aids so that the amount of text/graphical space given to a topic corresponds the amount of time that part of the talk will require, rather than the relative intellectual weight you assign.

- Avoid generic headings! The worst case is headings that simply state the technique that was used to collect the associated data. Better headings state in a few words the main conclusion you wish to draw from the data, or somehow draw the audience into the process of carrying out the work.

- Diagrams that work well in print very often need to be revised for oral presentations. Fonts usually need to be enlarged in order to be clearly visible from the back of the room. Also graphical content needs to be simplified for talks compared to papers, because the audience needs to be able to digest the data in just a few moments.

- Repetition can be very effective, when used judiciously. For example, you can prepare and remind your audience for the data they will digest by including simple graphical representations of those data in the outline and conclusion slides. This is a great way to give visual interest to presentation slides and to make your talk more memorable. Main points can also be repeated for emphasis (perhaps even verbatim) verbally or in visual aids, especially when multiple datasets clearly point to a single conclusion.

- As with repetition, dynamic visual aids can also be effective, but only when they are used appropriately and seamlessly. Animations or videos showing dynamic data naturally introduce a temporal element into the delivery, and it is important to time them well so as not to disrupt the natural flow of the talk. Another dynamic approach is to have elements of the visual aid appear and/or disappear in synchronization with the associated verbal discussion. This can be very effective in directing the audience’s attention to the point you wish to discuss, but too much appearing and disappearing of visual aids can make a presentation feel frantic.

* It is easy to get bogged down in the aesthetic aspects of your visual aids, but effort placed in this area leads to rapidly diminishing returns. Also, while everyone is entitled to their personal preferences regarding typeface, whitespace, and use of colors, you should never sacrifice legibility for artfulness. Thus, it is generally preferable to keep the talk aesthetically neutral.

##Prepare the delivery

Always remember the following when preparing to deliver a presentation: the focus of the talk should be the speaker, and not the visual aids. After all, if visuals alone were sufficient to deliver the message, researchers wouldn’t need to talk to one another at all! If you keep this general principle in mind throughout preparation of your delivery, it will help you avoid some of the most significant pitfalls.

A very thorough preparation for an oral presentation might involve initially writing out a complete “script” encompassing one version of what you want to say. Writing and then reading from a script will allow you to define and critically assess the content of the talk. A script is also handy for making initial estimates of how long the talk (and individual parts of the talk) will take to deliver. Running a few initial practice sessions with a script that you are happy with will also help you remember the main points that correspond to each visual aid, so that you won’t need to be constantly referring to notes during the real lecture. When coming up with an initial script, avoid the very common tendency to use jargon and complex sentence structures, because natural language and a conversational style often go over much better than an overly technical approach.

Once you feel the talk has been adequately prepared and planned, practice it a handful of times in a few different stages. First, read the script silently a few times while contemporaneously looking through the associated visual aids. Then transition to speaking out loud alone a few times. During this stage you should transition away from reading from a script, and rather rely on your memory and a few cue words written on cards (or the “presenter view” notes on your slide software). Next, find an empty space that more closely resembles the presentation environment (e.g., a conference room or classroom with a projector) and practice the full talk alone using only the cues that you plan to use in the actual talk. Finally, invite friends and/or colleagues to listen to a real “dry run” of the talk, and solicit their feedback on the technical and/or aesthetic aspects of the presentation.

As you practice your presentation, continue to make revision to fine-tune the visual aids and your delivery. Also, be aware that it is actually possible to practice too much! If you get the point rote memorization of the associated words and inflections, you can actually deliver the talk without your brain making an active connection between the words and the content. This will make you very inflexible and easy to “throw off” during the presentation. It is better to stop practicing while the content still feels at least a little bit fresh.

In addition to visual aids and the verbal content of the presentation, nonverbal indicators are important in the delivery of a presentation. These include body language like gestures, posture, and movement, as well as whether and how you indicate specific parts of visual aids, e.g., using a laser pointer. There are many examples of good and bad nonverbal cues during a presentation, but in general the best strategy is simply to practice in front of a live audience and solicit their honest feedback about anything you are doing that is unclear, distracting, or off-putting.

##Give the talk

Giving the final research presentation could be as easy as simply doing exactly what you have practiced. In reality, practice talks never adequately approximate the environment of giving a real research presentation, whether it is a group meeting presentation, a talk at a conference, or a seminar as part of a job interview. In fact, the best scientific talks are almost always the ones where the speaker has given the presentation publicly to an evaluative (and perhaps unfriendly) audience several times. This is definitely an area in which practice makes perfect.

When delivering the final lecture, make an effort exude confidence and excitement about the work. It is common, especially for young researchers, to feel overwhelmed or threatened when giving a presentation to senior (or perhaps renowned) colleagues. Keep in mind, though, that regardless of who is in the audience, you are the single person in the room with the most complete and intimate knowledge of the work that you are discussing. It is also highly likely that some members of the audience will have never considered the conclusions that you are discussing. This is your opportunity to get them excited about your work.

Most formal presentations include opportunities for the audience to ask questions, either contemporaneously or after the lecture is complete. When someone asks a question, be sure to take adequate time to actually absorb and consider their words. You can ask clarification questions to make sure you understand what is being asked. Try to keep the answers brief and specific to the question that was posed, in order to allow for as many questions to be fielded as possible. In the case of contemporaneous questions, it is fine to politely defer the answer to a later point in the lecture, if you a feel that it will be addressed in the course of your planned remarks. If a question is posed that for which you don’t know the answer, it is always better to answer honestly with “I don’t know,” or “We hadn’t considered that,” than to try to dodge the question or come up with a haphazard response on the fly. If a question is posed that you don’t understand, or if the answer will be necessarily lengthy, it is also fine to politely defer until after the talk, where you can speak at length in person. This strategy can also be used to minimize discomfort for you and the audience in the unlikely event that a questioner is being hostile.

Anxiety about oral presentations is inevitable, especially for novices or in circumstances where the stakes are high (e.g. a job interview). It is good to have a strategy for controlling nerves. One potentially effective strategy is to take a “mindfulness” approach that involves accepting that nervousness (which is really an activation of the body’s fight-or-flight response) is not indicative of danger, but rather it is a common and normal reaction to being the center of attention. Hopefully this will help diminish the emotional intensity of your nerves. You can couple this mental/emotional relaxation with physical relaxation exercises like deep breathing or stretching. Paying attention to your breathing is also helpful during the talk, as it facilitates good pacing and helps keep the audience relaxed as well. It is far more common for inexperienced speakers to move too quickly than too slowly. Having a glass or bottle of water can be helpful too, as it provides an excuse to insert some space between sentences.

To conclude, consider for a moment what is your ultimate goal in delivering a research presentation. One goal might be that the talk itself will help advance the associated research through new ideas, discussion, collaborative opportunities, etc. Keeping this, or any other goal, in mind throughout the process will help establish a solid trajectory in preparation and execution.
